hello maths fans i am incredibly excited
to bring you my latest video
with ben allen from maths with bad
drawings ben has written two books they
are
absolutely brilliant and you should
definitely go and read them as soon as
you finish watching this video
they're all about the maths of
everything and i mean
everything but today we're of course not
talking about everything
i'm here to talk about richard feynman
and in particular
his favorite maths trick differentiating
under the integral sign if you've done
some calculus
you'll know that derivatives aren't too
bad there's a few general rules
sure and you have to crunch through some
calculation but
usually you'll get to where you need to
be ben compares derivatives to an
office building where everything is
predictable and easy to find
if a little boring integrals on the
other hand are more like a fun
house with each room throwing up its own
surprise
and requiring its own map or technique
in order to get through
let's take the example of 1 over 1
plus x squared
now this you may recognize is a known
integral the answer is a known function
and is equal to arctan x
plus c now if i change the integral
ever so slightly by just increasing the
power of x
on the denominator to x cubed
so basically the same thing right
as i said before integrals much less
straightforward
so what can we do about it borrowing
from feynman
let's try combining the two
differentiation
plus integration and to see how this
works
let's take an example from the
apparently most
difficult undergraduate math class in
the us
at least according to wikipedia harvard
math 55.
so the integral we're going to look at
is
from naught to infinity
x to the power n e to the minus
x integrated with respect to
x one approach might be to try repeated
integration by
parts we have a polynomial power of
x here which we can reduce by continued
differentiation
and the exponential function will
integrate to basically give itself
so if we do this enough times we will
hopefully get down
to a zero power on the x and then
some kind of exponential function that
hopefully
we can integrate the first step in any
integration by parts
is to figure out what am i
differentiating what is my u
and what am i integrating what
represents dv
so here x to the n will be
u and dv will be given
by e to the minus x
now we want to keep differentiating the
power of x
so d u equals n
x to the n minus 1 and we want to
integrate the exponential
so v is going to be minus e to the minus
x now using my integration by parts
formula
this is equal to u dv is equal to the
integrated part u v so that's minus
e to the minus x x to the power n
evaluated at zero and infinity
and then it's minus the integral of
d u times v so minus minus gives me a
plus
and then i've got the integral from
naught to infinity
of n x to the n minus 1
e to the minus x so after one step
of integration by parts it looks as
follows
now if we evaluate these limits if i
plug in
infinity the exponential is e to the
minus infinity so that goes to zero
that kills the polynomial exponents beat
polynomials so that's zero and then if i
plug in the limit of zero
the exponential is one the polynomial is
zero zero times one is zero
so this whole term will actually vanish
and this will happen at every step in
fact so what we've done after one step
of integration by parts
is bring down an n x to a reduced power
and we have the same
exponential function so this is good
this is what we were hoping
was going to happen so now we want to
repeat the same process on our new
integral so if i take n
x to the n minus 1 that will be my u
u is n x to the n minus 1.
my dv is unchanged so dv is e to the
minus
x which means v is unchanged so minus e
to the minus x and now d u
differentiating i'll get
n minus 1 times n x to the n
minus 2. now it's basically the same
as what we had before so when i
substitute all of these in and do
integration by parts
the boundary terms the u and v will
again vanish
because u has got this power of x
so that will go to zero when x is zero
and
v is the exponential which will go to
zero as x goes to infinity
so we again lose boundary terms
and now i'm left with the integral
from naught to infinity of n
n minus 1 x to the n minus 2
e to the minus x dx
so after two steps of integration by
parts
we have reduced the power of x
down by two and what we've got in fact
are these two powers
in front of the otherwise basically the
same
form of the integral now we could carry
on and repeat the exact same process do
another set of integration by parts
and continue on basically until
this goes all the way to zero or we can
try and spot
the pattern so what's happening here is
that
each time we differentiate the x to
reduce its power
in each step of integration by parts the
boundary terms will always vanish
because you'll always have a power of x
positive power of x
which goes to zero at x equals naught
and the exponential to the minus x which
goes to
zero as x goes to infinity so the
boundary terms will always vanish at
each step
and so in fact what we're going to get
here
is after n steps so
after n times
integration by parts and n of course
here could be very very large it could
be a thousand it could be
4 billion 796 million 385
212 who knows after n lots of
integration by parts
we're just going to have all of these
terms in front of
x and here we've done it twice and it
was x to the n
minus 2. so if i do it n times it
becomes
x to the n minus n which is x to the
naught
which is 1. and that's what we wanted
here
so we're going to end up with n times n
minus 1
times m minus 2 times m minus 3 dot dot
dot dot times 2
times 1 also known as n factorial
so we have n factorial
then we've got x to the n minus n x to
the naught
one and then we have the integral from
naught to infinity
and we've seen at each step that v is
always
uh minus e to the minus x and dv is e to
the minus x
so dv here e to the minus x e to the
minus x it will be the same
here so that term is unchanged e to the
minus x
dx so we're almost done we've got all
the way down to something which i think
we can now
hopefully integrate so the n factorial
just stays out the front if i integrate
this
we did this before minus e to the minus
x
between 0 to infinity plugging in
at infinity e to the minus infinity
is zero and then we've got minus
minus one because e to the naught
is one the two minuses cancel so i just
get one so the final answer
is n factorial that
that was uh that was a lot of work so we
got there
sure this is the right answer n
factorial
but that was i think you'll agree one
hell of a slog
so this is where the magic of
differentiation under the integral sign
comes in so over to you mr feynman
our starting point is actually the last
step of my very
involved integration by parts
calculation that i just went through
so we begin with the integral from
naught to infinity
of e to the minus x
dx is equal to
one and we're going to make a very
slight modification
to this expression so if i take my
purple chalk and what we're going to do
is actually add
a here so this is now e to the minus a
x so that when we integrate this we now
have to divide by
a and so the answer now will be 1 over
a so this is still a true statement and
we could in fact have started here
but i just thought it was quite nice to
begin with the
the last point of our previous
calculation now this is where the magic
happens this is where we're going to
differentiate under the integral
sine and we're going to in fact
differentiate both sides of our
expression
with respect to a so
if i differentiate both sides with
respect to a
what's going to happen here is i get a
minus
and i still have the integral from
naught to infinity
i have differentiated with respect to a
so i've brought down an
x from here
then i've got e to the minus a x
dx so that's the left-hand side
differentiate with respect to a
and then i do the same on the right 1
over a or a to the minus 1 so it's minus
a to the minus 2
so it's minus 1 over
a squared now so far we've
differentiated with respect to a
once and we've ended up with x to the
power
1. seeing as we want x to the power
n we in fact want to differentiate
both sides of the expression n times
with respect to
a so we're going to differentiate under
our integral sign
a total of n times now
we've differentiated once and we got a
minus and an
x so if we differentiate n times we will
get minus one
n times so to the power n we then have
the integral from zero to infinity every
time we differentiate with respect to a
we get a power of x so this will be x
to the n e to the minus
a x dx
now for the right hand side same idea
with the minuses
the sign changes every time we
differentiate the power of a
so we still get a minus 1 to the n
the power of a itself increases every
time
so that's 1 over a to the
n plus one because we started with a
to the one on the denominator and every
time we differentiate we bring down the
power so if i differentiate here
i get a two then i'd have an a to the
minus three then i'd get a three next
time
so you in fact get an m factorial term
on the top from all of these continued
differentiations
now the final step is just to simplify
this
expression so first of all we can cancel
the minus 1 to the n
term from both sides as it's the same
and now what we want to do very clever
is to actually now
set a equal to one so if we
set a equals one
as our final step this becomes a one
and over here we've got one over one to
the power n plus 1 so that's just 1.
so just to neaten it all up we're just
left with
n factorial so setting a equal to 1
turns this into just e to the minus x
this
is now our original integral and the
right-hand side
all those powers of a disappear because
a is one and we get n
factorial this result while it's looking
pretty neat is also really powerful
because what we have here is an integral
definition of the factorial
function with the old definition we said
that n factorial was
n times n minus 1 times n minus 2
all the way down to 1. and so that would
only work
for positive whole numbers because
otherwise we didn't know when to stop
but what we've shown here is that the
new definition
using this integral formula is actually
equivalent
to the old definition and therefore
this can be used for any value of
n because plugging in any value of n
here makes complete sense
in the integral context this same trick
of differentiating under the integral
sign
can be used in countless other
situations and indeed was readily
employed by
feynman a famous example comes from his
time at the los alamos labs during world
war
ii he struggled to find his feet in
several departments when he first
arrived until one day
a researcher presented him with a
problem that had stumped the researchers
for three months
three entire months working on the same
integral can you imagine trying to do a
homework question
for that length of time when feynman saw
the integral
he suggested trying differentiation
under the
integral sign and supposedly the problem
was solved in under 30
minutes thank you everyone for watching
a huge thank you to ben from maths with
bad drawings for all of his brilliant
cartoons and also for contributing the
story which comes from his latest book
about calculus
called change is the only constant
remember to check out all of ben's books
and also remember to subscribe to my
channel if you've enjoyed this video
and i'll see you soon
you